At 2 Corinthians 1:3,
Jehovah is described
as “the God of all comfort”
and God of “tender mercies.”
And what is the Biblical understanding
of the word “comfort” in this context?
It literally means
“a calling to one’s side,”
standing beside a person
to encourage him when
he is going through a very difficult time.
One Bible scholar described
comfort this way:
“The word . . . always means
far more than soothing sympathy.”
The Christian comfort
is that which brings courage
and enables a man to cope
with all that life can do to him.
That describes Jehovah, doesn’t it?
He’s also called
“the Father of tender mercies,”
and that expression
“tender mercies” means to “feel pity”
and “cares very much.”
Jehovah is the source
of heartfelt pity and care.
Now, just to illustrate that,
let’s open our Bibles to Psalm 23
and look at verse 1.
Notice how Jehovah
is always there standing beside us
as a caring Shepherd.
Psalm 23:1 says:
“Jehovah is my Shepherd.
I will lack nothing.”
So whatever life throws at us
—in line with a word of comfort—
Jehovah, as our caring Shepherd,
will provide what we need.
And this expression
“shepherd” is very fitting
because a Middle Eastern shepherd
cared deeply for his sheep.
He would inspect them every day.
He knew their names,
and if he saw any indication
of sickness or pain,
he would treat them right away.
He would give them medicine if it was needed.
And if they were too weak
to stand up while they were recovering,
he would actually (literally) hold them up
so that they would not lie down
and die and give up.
Well, Jehovah is there for us, isn’t he?
When we go through difficulties
and we just feel like lying down,
he’s there to carry the load for us
and to prop us up as a caring Shepherd.
This concept of having what we need
is also highlighted
at 2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
Paul, under inspiration,
is talking about the inspired Scriptures
and how beneficial they are.
And what is the result
of one taking advantage of the comfort
Jehovah gives through the Scriptures?
It says: “So that the man of God
may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.”
And we might add, not only “every good work”
but everything that life may bring upon us.
That expression “completely equipped”
literally means “having been fitted out,”
and sometimes it was used to describe a boat
that was completely outfitted with everything
that was needed for a successful voyage,
or it may refer to a machine
that was always able
to live up to what it was designed to do.
So Jehovah always gives us what we need
regardless of the nature
of the stress or strain.
Now, just to use one illustration
of how Jehovah’s Word can help us,
it’s like Jehovah is standing by us
to prop us up.
Let’s talk about something
that can be very emotionally draining
and very difficult to deal with,
and that’s loneliness.
Loneliness is a longing
to be loved by someone,
to be understood,
to feel needed, wanted, appreciated.
And when those things are not met,
a person can feel very empty inside.
Now, being alone
is not the same as loneliness, is it?
Being alone is a state
of a geographic situation.
Loneliness is an emotional condition,
because some
of the loneliest people in the world
are surrounded by millions in large cities.
So it’s not just having people around;
there has to be a connection there;
there has to be more than just people.
Well, notice the words of Psalm 68:6
that show what Jehovah does
for those who may be experiencing loneliness.
The first part of Psalm 68:6 says:
“God gives those who are alone
a home to dwell in.”
Now we notice here,
he didn’t say that in this case
he gives him a house, a shelter, a cover.
It’s true Jehovah does that.
But a home conveys much more, doesn’t it?
A home is a place where
we have family members
that get along, work together, play together.
There is a united sense of belonging.
They feel needed, wanted, and appreciated
when there’s a happy family life,
and these joyful relationships
become the cure to loneliness.
Now just to illustrate that point,
one of our sisters who
was reported on in our public edition
of The Watchtower, No. 1 2018,
had suffered many losses,
and she said she felt very alone.
But then she considered
the very text we’ve just read at Psalm 68:6,
and notice what she said:
“I knew that the verse could not just mean
“a home in a physical sense now.
“Rather, I came to understand
that God offers us a spiritual home,
“a place of real safety
that provides genuine connections
and emotional attachment
to others who love Jehovah.”
So Jehovah gave her a home, not just a house.
He gave her a home with relationships
and people that cared about her.
And she felt less lonely.
But Jehovah provides that, doesn’t he?
Now in line with that same thought,
let’s open our Bibles to Mark chapter 10
—Mark chapter 10—
and we’ll again see the difference
between a house and relationships.
In Mark chapter 10,
Jesus is talking about this matter
of a person leaving possessions,
houses, and family
for the sake of the good news.
So, what does he say about that?
Well, in verse 29 he says this of Mark 10:
“Truly I say to you,
no one [who] has left house
“or brothers or sisters
or mother or father or children.”
So he distinguishes
between a house and relationships.
And he says that in imitation of his Father,
he’s going to make sure that those
who become isolated or give up things—
What are they going to get?
Verse 30: ‘A hundred times more now
‘—[not just in a house but]
brothers, sisters, mothers, children.’
The loneliness factor is addressed
within the arrangements and provisions
that come from serving Jehovah
and being a disciple of Christ.
So how good it is for us to remember
that we can imitate Jehovah!
And even though we are surrounded
by many people here
in our Bethel family
and in our other assignments,
we always want to make sure that it’s
not just about being around a lot of people.
But we’re doing what we can,
like Jehovah, to stand beside,
comfort, show that we really care,
and help them to get away
from any feelings of loneliness
that they may be experiencing.
Well, one caution
we’d like to mention in conclusion
of our little discussion this morning
is the fact that we have to be careful
that we don’t default to false comforters.
We have the best comforters, don’t we?
We have Jehovah; we have Christ Jesus;
we have a loving brotherhood.
But sometimes when a person is going
through stress or loneliness or other trials,
false comforters can make matters worse.
Remember how Job
described his so-called friends
who came to comfort him in all of his trials?
At Job 16:2 he said:
“All of you are troublesome comforters!”
And at Job 13:4 he said:
“You are useless physicians.”
They weren’t helping a bit.
In fact, they made his situation worse
because of the things they said.
And their attitude toward Job
brought out some
of the not-so-good points in Job.
They made his situation worse.
Well, what could be
like a false comforter today
—useless, troublesome?
Well, sometimes people
will turn to an escape route.
If they’re not careful,
they’ll turn to a false comforter
in the form of overindulgence
or the misuse
(the immoderate use) of alcohol,
trying to just escape
what they may be feeling or experiencing.
Sometimes people will escape
by means of fantasizing about things
that are totally improper,
thinking they’ll escape and get some relief.
But it makes things worse, doesn’t it?
Or a person may be discouraged
and resort to some weakness of the flesh,
thinking that a temporary moment of pleasure
might make them feel better.
But all of those things
are not true comforters, are they?
They make matters worse.
They create the need for more comforters.
So in imitation of Jehovah,
may we do what we can to comfort others.
But may we always remember
that our comforter is our loving Creator,
“the Father of tender mercies
and the God of all comfort,”
who helps us to cope
with whatever life throws at us.